Hello, Dokenyahunbi.
Cleo Echwayatonka Emagiyabi, Nakoda Oyade, Ake wachimnaginkta.
Wa-shte.
I'm from Treaty 4 Territory.
I just introduced myself.
My name is Cleo Big Eagle.
I am from Saskatchewan and the communities that I'm from are from White Bear First Nation and Ocean Man First Nation, my home communities.
And I call them both my communities.
But I am actually only a band membership of Ocean Man First Nation.
So today I wanted to talk to you about being a public servant.
I have been a public servant for many years now, and when I became a public servant, was through a student internship program.
But to get there first, I was in a different province and I had to leave my home community when I was a teenager
just for to make sure I finished school, going to school in the country wasn't that easy in high school.
There was racism in the school, in town.
And so this student internship program that I applied for and I happened to get offered a job.
And I think sometimes from my culture, we are taught that everyone has gifts that they are born with.
And also that the purpose that you have in your life will present itself in your different experiences on on your path of life.
So at the time, I didn't think about working that I wanted to work with government,
but I did apply and I got the job and I started working for government.
And so I started realizing that working in government that maybe this was a way I could make change for my people
and, you know, try to make things different for people living in the community.
Growing up in the community, the things that I saw and lived through the community,
I thought, you know, I didn't understand why it was different in our community than some other areas.
So with that purpose in mind of trying to make change inside government wasn't easy back then.
There was a lot of different obstacles.
As a young native person working in government, sometimes you're looked over for different things.
And I remember being introduced around my first team that I was being introduced around, and I was the only native person there
and one of the ladies that she was non-Indigenous and she had red hair and she said to me, Oh, you're Cleo Big Eagle.
And she had this different image of what she thought a native person looked like.
And so I didn't fit that image that she had in her head.
And so she told me that and that kind of surprised me that somebody would be that blatant to say something like that.
And so the lady that was introducing me around, she really quickly escorted me to the next person to go, Oh, let's go over here and meet other people.
So I thought that being a young person, I wasn't really sure what that was until later.
I realized, okay, that's that's what racism looks like, you know.
And so different things like that have happened throughout the career, just trying to apply for different jobs.
And you wonder why other people were, you know, given jobs or were accepted for certain jobs and we were overlooked.
So I think nowadays I started working in government before Indian residential schools settlement agreement was filed
and it was during the time of the RCAP Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples.
And I think understanding some of those things and the struggles that people went through to get to where we are today.
And this is what 2022 and where I'm working right now in Ottawa, in federal government, which is far, far away from my home community.
But I think that if we're not in these jobs and to make any kind of influence, there won't be any change.
So I think it's important for young Indigenous students to follow their dreams, follow their path, follow their gifts that they were given.
And if working in government is some place for you, then I think that's some place that you should follow
and make your difference where you can and I think use your gifts.
I also wanted to share about the reason why I'm working where I am, and the department that I'm working at right now is Library and Archives Canada.
And this job is it's not a permanent type of program in government.
We want to try to make it a permanent program.
But I think the purpose of the work that we're doing is with promoting cultural heritage and the understanding of reconciliation in Canada to Canadians.
And we are going into the archives and we're looking at the different collections to see what kind of things we can find
so we can share these stories with the public, with all public, and with our communities and the people.
And we're also providing funding program for cultural heritage organizations
to help them build their capacity to build either whether it's the language or just to preserve their culture and their language.
So this is something that I think is very important.
The reason why I think it's very important is from my previous work in First Nation and Inuit Health Branch working in mental wellness division.
I met some really amazing First Nation doctors that were working on mental health and wellness.
And one of the things that they shared that really resonated with me is that they said our culture is our medicine
and our language is our medicine and our cultural teachings are our medicine.
And so that made so much sense to me.
And that's why I think with the work that I'm doing now with promoting cultural heritage for Indigenous,
all Indigenous groups, First Nation, Inuit and Métis in Canada, I think that is something that I think is important.
So in 20 years from now, you know, we're hoping that maybe there won't be that many Indigenous languages being lost.
So thank you for listening.
Have a good day and Ake wacheemnaginkta.